.. sectnum::
.. default-role:: math

.. meta::
  :title: Introduction to CS
  :date: 30/01/2018
  :template: single


Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

:Cryptology: Science of data security against adversaries.

About the course:

- not *just* about encryption.
- not necessarily limited to communications (eg. disk encryption).
- not all of information security (concerns of social engineering, implementation bugs, risk management, won't be covered)

.. example:: Basic example

   How to check that 2 distant files are identical, with small communication between servers?
   => Compute the hashes (on 512 bits, for example).

.. example:: Very classical example

   I (Alice) want to buy something on *itch.io* (Bob).
   We want a **secure channel**, even though it's totally insecure at the start of the interaction.

   One solution: **TLS/SSL**.

   - STEP 1: **Authentification** (achieved with digital signatures).
     Alice wants to be certain that this is indeed Bob.
     Someone else could try to impersonate Bob, after possibly seeing many interactions with Bob.

   - STEP 2: **Handshake** (achieved with public-key encryption).
     Alice and Bob generate a *shared secret*, over a public channel.

   - STEP 3: **Communication** (with respect to confidentiality) (achieved via symetric encryption).
     Alice and Bob use this shared key to encrypt and decrypt data.

- Anonymous communications (eg. Tor)

- E-cash, which we would like to be:

  + anonymous
  + authentic (can't be forged)
  + non-duplicable

- E-voting

  + anonimity
  + impossibility of ballot stuffing
  + impossibility to coerce
  + verifiability
  + authentic (can't be forged)
  + non-duplicable


Computing over encrypted data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:Homomorphic encryption: From `Enc(m)` and `f`, we can get `Enc(f(m))`.
:Functional encryption: From `Enc(m)` and `key_f`, we can get `f(m)` (and nothing else).
:Secure multiparty computation:
  `k` users with messages `m_1 \dots m_k` interact to compute `f((m_i)_i)` without revealing nothing else.

Cryptography is a *science*:

- Define the wanted functionality
- Propose a realization of the protocol
- Prove that if an attack exists, then one can efficiently solve an algorithmic problem that is presumed intractable.

-> Cryptography is the happy face of complexity theory.
-> Most cryptography problems have a strong algebraic flavour.

- Non-public protocols should be considered insecure.
- Source of security should be *concentrated* (typically, only the random choice of a key).


.. definition:: Encryption scheme

   Let's denote:

   - `K`: Key space.
   - `P`: Plain text space.
   - `C`: Cipher text space.

   An **encryption scheme** over `K \times P \times C` finite is a triple of algorithms:

   - **KeyGen**: samples a `k` in `K` (probabilistic algorithm).
   - **Enc**: `K \times P \rightarrow C` (possibly probalistic).
   - **Dec**: `K \times C \rightarrow P` (typically deterministic).

   :Correctness requirement:
      `\forall k, m : Dec(k, Enc(k, m)) = m`

Assumptions:

- `C = Enc(K \times P)`
- `m` and `k` are independant random variables.
- Every `k \in K` and `m \in P` have a non null probability of being picked.

.. note:: We do not assume the algorithms to be efficient.

.. definition:: Secrecy, Shannon 49

   .. math::
     \forall \bar{m} \in P,\ \bar{c} \in C,
       Pr\{m = \bar{m} | Enc(k, m) = \bar{c}\} = Pr\{m = \bar{m}\}

   i.e: knowing the ciphertext does not provide any extra information on the message.

.. note::

   `Pr` is taken over:

   - the random choice of `m`.
   - the random choice of `k`.
   - the internal randomness of `Enc`.

Equivalent formula:

.. math:: Pr\{m = \bar{m} \cup Enc(k, m) = \bar{c}\} = Pr\{m = \bar{m}\} \cdot \{Enc(k, m) = \bar{c}\}

.. remark:: the random variables `m` and `Enc(k, m)` are independent.

.. lemma:: Shannon

   Perfect secrecy `\Rightarrow |K| \geq |P|`

.. proof::

   Take `\bar{c} \in C`.
